Let's begin.
Threats in the wake of bin Laden's death have spiked.
Baman in Somalia.
Police pepper spray.
Vicious cartels.
Caustic cruise lines.
The sun will decay.
65 dead.
Cyber attacks.
Drug war.
Mass destruction.
Tornado.
Recession.
Default.
Doomsday.
Egypt.
Syria.
Crisis.
Death.
Disaster.
Oh my god.
So those are just a few of the clips I collected over the last six months.
Could have easily been the last six days or the last six years.
The point is that the news media preferentially feeds us negative stories because that's what
our minds pay attention to.
And there's a very good reason for that.
Every second of every day, our senses bring in way too much data than we can possibly
process in our brains.
And because nothing is more important to us than survival, the first stop of all of that
data is an ancient sliver of the temporal lobe called the amygdala.
Now the amygdala is our early warning detector, our danger detector.
It sorts and scours through all of the information, looking for anything in the environment that
might harm us.
So given a dozen news stories, we will preferentially look at the negative news.
And that old newspaper saying, if it bleeds, it leads, is very true.
So given all of our digital devices that are bringing all the negative news to us seven
days a week, 24 hours a day, it's no wonder that we're pessimistic.
It's no wonder that people think that the world is getting worse.
But perhaps that's not the case.
Perhaps instead it's the distortions brought to us of what's really going on.
Perhaps the tremendous progress we've made over the last century by a series of forces
are in fact accelerating to a point that we have the potential in the next three decades
to create a world of abundance.
Now I'm not saying we don't have our set of problems.
Climate crisis, species extinction, water and energy shortage, we surely do.
And as humans, we are far better at seeing the problems way in advance, but ultimately
we knock them down.
So let's look at what this last century has been to see where we're going.
Over the last 100 years, the average human lifespan has more than doubled.
Average per capita income adjusted for inflation around the world has tripled.
Childhood mortality has come down a factor of 10.
Add to that the cost of food, electricity, transportation, communications have dropped
10 to 1,000 fold.
Steve Pinker has showed us that in fact we're living during the most peaceful time ever
in human history.
And Charles Kenney, that global literacy has gone from 25 percent to over 80 percent in
the last 130 years.
We truly are living in an extraordinary time.
And many people forget this, and we keep setting our expectations higher and higher.
In fact, we redefine what poverty means.
Think of this, in America today, the majority of people under the poverty line still have
electricity, water, toilets, refrigerators, television, mobile phones, air conditioning
and cars.
The wealthiest robber barons of the last century, the emperors on this planet, could have never
dreamed of such luxuries.
Underpinning much of this is technology, and of late, exponentially growing technologies.
My good friend Ray Kurzweil showed that any tool that becomes an information technology
jumps on this curve, on Moore's Law, and experiences price performance doubling every 12 to 24
months.
That's why the cell phone in your pocket is literally a million times cheaper and a thousand
times faster than a supercomputer of the 70s.
Now look at this curve.
This is Moore's Law over the last hundred years.
I want you to notice two things from this curve.
Number one, how smooth it is through good time and bad time, war time and peace time,
recession, depression, and boom time.
This is the result of faster computers being used to build faster computers.
It doesn't slow for any of our grand challenges.
And also, even though it's plotted on a log curve on the left, it's curving upwards.
The rate at which the technology is getting faster is itself getting faster.
And on this curve, riding on Moore's Law, are a set of extraordinarily powerful technologies
available to all of us.
Cloud computing, what my friends at Autodesk call infinite computing, sensors and networks,
robotics, 3D printing, which is the ability to democratize and distribute personalized
production around the planet, synthetic biology, fuels, vaccines and foods, digital medicine,
nanomaterials and AI.
How many of you saw the winning of Jeopardy by IBM's Watson?
That was epic.
In fact, I scoured the headlines looking for the best headline in the newspaper I could
and I love this, Watson vanquishes human opponents.
Jeopardy is not an easy game.
It's about the nuance of human language.
And imagine if you would, AIs like this on the cloud available to every person with a
cell phone.
Four years ago here at TED, Ray Kurzweil and I started a new university called Singularity
University.
And we teach our students all of these technologies, in particular, how they can be used to solve
humanity's grand challenges.
And every year we ask them to start a company or product or service that can affect positively
the lives of a billion people within a decade.
Think about that.
The fact that literally a group of students can touch the lives of a billion people today.
30 years ago that would have sounded ludicrous.
Today we can point at dozens of companies that have done just that.
So when I think about creating abundance, it's not about creating a life of luxury for
a planet.
It's about creating a life of possibility.
It is about taking that which was scarce and making it abundant.
You see, scarcity is contextual and technology is a resource liberating force.
Let me give you an example.
So this is a story of Napoleon III in the mid-1800s.
He's the dude on the left.
He invited over to dinner the King of Siam.
All of Napoleon's troops were fed with silver utensils.
Napoleon himself with gold utensils.
But the King of Siam, he was fed with aluminum utensils.
You see, aluminum was the most valuable metal on the planet, worth more than gold and platinum.
It's the reason that the tip of the Washington Monument is made of aluminum.
You see, even though aluminum is 8.3% of the earth by mass, it doesn't come as a pure metal.
It's all bound by oxygen and silicates.
But then a technology of electrolysis came along and literally made aluminum so cheap
that we use it with throwaway mentality.
So let's project this analogy going forward.
We think about energy scarcity.
Ladies and gentlemen, we are on a planet that is bathed with 5,000 times more energy than
we use in a year.
Sixteen terawatts of energy hit the earth's surface every 88 minutes.
It's not about being scarce, it's about accessibility.
And there's good news here.
For the first time this year, the cost of solar-generated electricity is 50% that of
diesel-generated electricity in India, 8.8 rupees versus 17 rupees.
The cost of solar dropped 50% last year.
Last month, MIT put out a study showing that by the end of this decade, in the sunny parts
of the United States, solar electricity would be 6 cents a kilowatt hour compared to 15
cents as a national average.
And if we have abundant energy, we also have abundant water.
Now, we talk about water wars.
Do you remember when Carl Sagan turned the Voyager spacecraft back towards the earth
in 1990 after it just passed Saturn?
He took a famous photo.
What was it called?
A pale blue dot.
Because we live on a water planet.
We live on a planet 70% covered by water.
Yes, 97.5% is salt water, 2% is ice, and we fight over a half a percent of the water
on this planet.
But here, too, there is hope.
And there is technology coming online, not 10, 20 years from now, right now.
There's nanotechnology coming on, nanomaterials.
And the conversation I had with Dean Kamen this morning, one of the great DIY innovators
I'd like to share with you, he gave me permission to do so.
This technology, called Slingshot, that many of you may have heard of, it's the size of
a small dorm room refrigerator.
It's able to generate 1,000 liters of clean drinking water a day out of any source, salt
water, polluted water, latrine, at less than 2 cents a liter.
The chairman of Coca-Cola has just agreed to do a major test of hundreds of units of
this in the developing world.
And if that pans out, which of every confidence it will, Coca-Cola will deploy this globally
to 206 countries around the planet.
This is the kind of innovation, empowered by this technology, that exists today.
And we've seen this in cell phones.
My goodness, we're going to hit 70% penetration of cell phones in the developing world by
the end of 2013.
Think about it, that a Maasai warrior on a cell phone in the middle of Kenya has better
mobile com than President Reagan did 25 years ago.
And if they're on a smartphone on Google, they've got access to more knowledge and information
than President Clinton did 15 years ago.
They're living in a world of information and communication abundance that no one could
have ever predicted.
Better than that, the things that you and I spent tens and hundreds of thousands of
dollars for, GPS, HD video and still images, libraries of books and music, medical diagnostic
technology are now literally dematerializing and demonetizing into your cell phone.
Probably the best part of it is what's coming down the pike in health.
Last month, I had the pleasure of announcing with Qualcomm Foundation something called
the $10 million Qualcomm TriQuarter XPRIZE.
We're challenging teams around the world to basically combine these technologies into
a mobile device that you can speak to because it's got AI, you can cough on it, you can
do a finger blood trick, and to win, it needs to be able to diagnose you better than a team
of board certified doctors.
So literally, imagine this device in the middle of the developing world where there are no
doctors.
1.5% of the disease burden and 1.3% of the healthcare workers.
When this device sequences an RNA or DNA virus that it doesn't recognize, it calls the CDC
and prevents the pandemic from happening in the first place.
But here, here is the biggest force for bringing about a world of abundance.
I call it the rising billion.
So the white lines here are population.
We just passed the 7 billion mark on earth.
And by the way, the biggest protection against a population explosion is making the world
educated and healthy.
In 2010, we had just short of 2 billion people online connected.
By 2020, that's going from 2 billion to 5 billion internet users.
Three billion new minds who have never been heard from before are connecting to the global
conversation.
What will these people want?
What will they consume?
What will they desire?
And rather than having economic shutdown, we're about to have the biggest economic injection
ever.
These people represent tens of trillions of dollars injected into the global economy.
And they will get healthier by using a tricorder, and they'll become better educated by using
the Khan Academy, and by literally being able to use 3D printing and infinite computing
more productive than ever before.
So what could 3 billion rising, healthy, educated, productive members of humanity bring to us?
How about a set of voices that have never been heard from before?
What about giving the oppressed, wherever they might be, the voice to be heard and the
voice to act for the first time ever?
What will these 3 billion people bring?
What about contributions we can't even predict?
The one thing I've learned at the XPRIZE is that small teams driven by their passion with
a clearer focus can do extraordinary things, things that large corporations and governments
could only do in the past.
Let me share and close with a story that really got me excited.
There is a program that some of you might have heard of.
It's a game called Foldit.
It came out of the University of Washington in Seattle.
And this is a game where individuals can actually take a sequence of amino acids and figure
out how the protein is going to fold.
And how it folds dictates its structure and its functionality.
It's very important for research and medicine, and up until now, it's been a supercomputer
problem.
And this game has been played by university professors and so forth, and it's literally
hundreds of thousands of people came online and started playing it, and it showed that
in fact today, the human pattern recognition machinery is better at folding proteins than
the best computers.
And when these individuals went and looked at who is the best protein folder in the world,
it wasn't an MIT professor, it wasn't a Caltech student, it was a person from England, from
Manchester, a woman, who during the day was an executive assistant at a rehab clinic,
and at night was the world's best protein folder.
Ladies and gentlemen, what gives me tremendous confidence in the future is the fact that
we are now more empowered as individuals to take on the grand challenges of this planet.
We have the tools with this exponential technology, we have the passion of the DIY innovator,
we have the capital of the techno-philanthropist, and we have three billion new minds coming
online to work with us to solve the grand challenges, to do that which we must do.
We are living into an extraordinary decades ahead.
Thank you.
Thank you.
Thank you.
